**10-scott.ogg** (5m 20s)
<https://jotengine.com/transcriptions/dT2066h5MCAJX9FQovta2g>
**2 speakers** (Scott, Russ)

*[0:00:01]*
**Scott**: Alright.

*[0:00:01]*
**Russ**: You're on.

*[0:00:02]*
**Scott**: I'm so pleased to talk today in honor of Russ, who mentored me as a grad student, and who has continued to be a dear friend. I came to him as an environmental student in 1995, and we studied hydrothermal plumes together, and I emerged interested in environmental problems like this one in the Pacific Northwest: he low population of Southern Resident killer whales that were declining as I was in grad school, and led to their listing as endangered species. I started a non-profit called Beam Reach, and we chose to study orcas because they already beloved, charismatic megafauna thanks to the Free Willy movies. I guess I thought more mundane marine animals were probably doomed if we couldn't save what are essentially sea pandas. No pointed out in the recovery plan that lack of fish and persistent pollutants and ships might be an issue for these whales. So we started studying them bioacoustically and in part because we knew that if it was acoustics, if it was noise, that was part of the problem that was something we could solve on short time scales. We got to hear their beautiful sounds, and over about 10 years we developed the ability to put hydrophones in the water and calibrate them and gather recordings of killer whales like the ones you heard. We also noticed that ships were really prevalent. We gathered about two years of data, and sampled about 1500 unique ships. This is what we found: compared to the background in blue, ships are louder at these low frequencies than the background, but they're also louder than the background noise at high frequencies. Different ships are louder than others, which was the good news. And even within a class of ships we saw a lot of variation in noise. So this would be a typical container ship, and it's right in between ... its source level, how loud it is, right next to it, it's in between what the orcas make as calls and what they make as clicks. Other ships are outliers compared to those spectra I showed you. In the modeling I'm going to talk about, you have to remember that some of the ships are much worse than the medians that we're using for the modeling. So we're going to come up with some worst case scenarios. The bad news is that the noise probably does matter to many animals that we hadn't even really even begun thinking about in terms of how they use sound. How are we going to try and answer does this noise matter to various species? One approach is to estimate the volume that an animal has available to it acoustically when it's quiet, and then compare it to a smaller volume when it gets noisy. We did that using our median curves, sort of like a typical ship. We found that for the communications space the calls that killer whales are making trying to communicate, the volume goes down about 95% for a median ship. If you look at how does the volume available for finding salmon change when they're echolocating using these louder, higher frequency signals, it drops by about 50% depending on how loud the ship is. A median ship is about ... The distance at which they can see a salmon or hear the echo off of a salmon swim bladder goes down by about half. The initial modeling, I think it needs to be done better than it's been done, it's kind of what I'm working on right now, is showing that this very challenging task of hearing the echoes off of a fish, a Chinook salmon, their preferred prey, are being made much more challenging by the ship noise. Here's an image off Lime Kiln, the west side of San Juan Island, right where you're seeing, really, the missing piece of this model that would answer the question of does it matter, which is where we need to know more about the distribution of salmon. But the good news is that, although ocean noise is probably a major factor for killer whales , globally there's some hope, and locally. Even though it's noisy here, internationally we had the International Maritime Organization introducing some voluntary guidelines for noise pollution from ships. And the Port of Vancouver is already incentivizing ships to quiet themselves. That leaves me thinking about thsubmersion field of marine eco-acoustics, and a planet where the population may continue to grow or may peak in our lifetime. I think we can conserve the places that are quiet, mitigate like the Port of Metro Vancouver to make ships quieter, and most importantly, maybe, try to consume less, thereby reduce the shipping presence on the planet. Thanks a lot.
*[0:05:19]*